In this section, we'll learn more about Spring AOP.
And in order to understand what it is, we first have to understand what AOP is.
AOP stands for aspect-oriented programming,
and it's a programming paradigm that aims to increase the modularity by
allowing the separation of cross-cutting concerns.
Now, you may be a little confused with what exactly that means,
so let's break up this definition into three separate parts.
First, when we say it's a programming paradigm,
that simply means that it's just a way of programming or writing code,
and second, the definition says that it aims to increase modularity.
And in simple terms, this just means that it increases organization.
And third, it allows you to separate cross-cutting concerns,
or concerns that affect many parts of an application
because they span multiple layers, or tiers,
of the application.
A classic example of a cross-cutting concern is security because security
can't be contained to any one area of the application,
and instead it spans multiple parts of the application.
You can find it throughout various areas of the application.
So just to recap,
AOP is a way of programming that increases organization of
code for concerns that span multiple layers,
or tiers, of an application.
Just to give you an idea, without AOP, solving concerns that are cross-cutting,
results in scattered and duplicated code across many parts of the application.
AOP is really beyond the scope of this course,
but let's quickly look at the benefits that Spring AOP provides,
and we'll finish with a concrete example.
Spring AOP is an implementation of AOP within the Spring Framework,
and it mainly has two uses,
with the first being used to implement certain features
within the Spring Framework itself,
and the second being a valuable tool for developers that need
to solve problems that span multiple layers,
or tiers, of their application.
It's sort of a nice tool to have in their toolbox.
As I mentioned before,
security is a great example of something that AOP can solve.
So let's look at a typical example of a piece of code that's only allowed to be
executed by persons who are authorized and authenticated.
We first check if the user is authenticated and if they have the correct role,
for instance, like an administrator role,
and if they do, this sensitive operation is allowed to execute.
And if not, we raise an error, maybe log that failed attempt,
and redirect the user to a login page.
This same series of operations is likely to occur in
many places throughout the application.
Basically anywhere there's a sensitive operation.
And instead of spreading this same logic throughout all of the application,
Spring AOP allows us to organize these operations into a single area that
can be applied to different parts of the application.
Now let's look at an example that utilizes Spring Security,
a project that we'll discuss further in a future module.
Spring Security utilizes the Spring Framework's AOP support
behind the scenes to implement security.
In our example,
the sensitive method is annotated with the @PreAuthorize annotation,
and it has a condition to ensure that the user has
the role of admin for instance.
And remember that annotations are just metadata that's added to the code.
And by adding this metadata,
Spring AOP can identify that this method requires security,
and apply the appropriate security logic.
The added benefit of this is that the logic within the
sensitive operation becomes very clear,
and it's not cluttered with surrounding logic that's not directly related
to what the logic is trying to accomplish just to ensure that the user is
secured and authorized to execute this method.
It's just the sensitive operation.
If you want to learn more about Spring AOP,
there's an excellent course on Pluralsight by Eberhard Wolff called Aspect Oriented Programming using Spring AOP and AspectJ.